api/README.md, before:

# EyeD API

FastAPI REST API layer for the EyeD AI Attendance System.

## Setup

1. Install dependencies:
```bash
pip install -r requirements.txt
```

2. Make sure you're in the project root directory.

## Running the API Server

### Development Mode

```bash
python -m api.main
```

Or using uvicorn directly:

```bash
uvicorn api.main:app --reload --host 0.0.0.0 --port 8000
```

### Production Mode

```bash
uvicorn api.main:app --host 0.0.0.0 --port 8000 --workers 4
```

## API Documentation

Once the server is running, visit:
- **Swagger UI**: http://localhost:8000/docs
- **ReDoc**: http://localhost:8000/redoc

## Endpoints

### Attendance
- `POST /api/attendance/mark` - Mark attendance with face recognition and liveness detection

### Health Check
- `GET /health` - Health check endpoint
- `GET /` - Root endpoint with API info

## Architecture

This API layer follows Clean Architecture principles:
- **Thin adapter layer**: Converts HTTP requests/responses to/from use cases
- **No business logic**: All business logic is in use cases and domain services
- **Dependency injection**: Use cases are injected via FastAPI dependencies
- **Error handling**: Domain exceptions are converted to appropriate HTTP responses

## CORS

CORS is configured to allow requests from:
- `http://localhost:3000` (Next.js dev server)
- `http://localhost:3001` (Alternative Next.js port)

To add more origins, edit `api/middleware/cors.py`.

Commit message:

Update face recognition system and attendance features

api/README.md, after:

# EyeD API

FastAPI REST API layer for the EyeD AI Attendance System.

## Setup

1. Install dependencies:
```bash
pip install -r requirements.txt
```

2. Make sure you're in the project root directory.

## Running the API Server

### Development Mode

```bash
python -m api.main
```

Or using uvicorn directly:

```bash
uvicorn api.main:app --reload --host 0.0.0.0 --port 8000
```

### Production Mode

```bash
uvicorn api.main:app --host 0.0.0.0 --port 8000 --workers 4
```

## API Documentation

Once the server is running, visit:
- **Swagger UI**: http://localhost:8000/docs
- **ReDoc**: http://localhost:8000/redoc

## Endpoints

### Attendance
- `POST /api/attendance/mark` - Mark attendance with face recognition and liveness detection
- `POST /api/attendance/mark-class` - Mark attendance for entire class from single photo. This endpoint accepts a single class photo, uses YOLO (Ultralytics) for face detection optimized for multi-face detection in group photos, recognizes students, and marks attendance for all recognized students. Uses YOLOv8 or YOLOv11 face detection model for improved accuracy in group photos. Liveness verification is skipped for photo-based attendance.

### Health Check
- `GET /health` - Health check endpoint
- `GET /` - Root endpoint with API info

## Architecture

This API layer follows Clean Architecture principles:
- **Thin adapter layer**: Converts HTTP requests/responses to/from use cases
- **No business logic**: All business logic is in use cases and domain services
- **Dependency injection**: Use cases are injected via FastAPI dependencies
- **Error handling**: Domain exceptions are converted to appropriate HTTP responses

## CORS

CORS is configured to allow requests from:
- `http://localhost:3000` (Next.js dev server)
- `http://localhost:3001` (Alternative Next.js port)

To add more origins, edit `api/middleware/cors.py`.
